# Tutorials

The aim of this chapter is to explain the fundamental concepts of Webots
required to create your own simulations. Learning is focused on the modeling of
robots and of their environment, as well as on the programming of robot
controllers. You will also learn where to find the documentation to go further.

This chapter is suitable for absolute beginners in Webots. A background in
programming is nevertheless required. The examples are written in C language. If
you are not familiar with the C language, you should be able to understand this
chapter anyway, because the C programs below are very simple. Except for
programming, you don't need any particular knowledge to go through the tutorials
included in this chapter. However a basic background knowledge in robotics,
mathematics, modeling and tree representation might turn out to be helpful.
Experienced Webots users may skip the first tutorials. However, we would
recommend them to read at least the introduction and conclusion of these
tutorials.

Each section of this chapter (except the first one and the last one) is a
tutorial. Each tutorial has a precise educational objective explained in the
first paragraph. The acquired  concepts are then summarized in the conclusion
subsection. A tutorial is designed as a sequence of interactive steps. The
knowledge acquired in a tutorial is often required to continue with the next
tutorial. Therefore we strongly recommend you to respect their natural order.
Moreover we recommend you to ensure you understood all the concepts of a
tutorial before proceeding further.

A Webots PRO license or a 30-days trial license is required to follow all the
tutorials. However, an EDU license is sufficient to follow about 95% of this
chapter, as it won't allow you to program supervisor processes and physics
plugins.

The last section will provide you with some hints to address problems that are
not covered in this chapter.

The solutions of the tutorials are located into the
"WEBOTS_MODULES_PATH/projects/samples/tutorials" subdirectory of the Webots
installation directory.

We hope you will enjoy your first steps with Webots. Meanwhile, we would really
appreciate to receive your feedback regarding this chapter.

